Customizing Fields
===================

In the previous chapter, we used *fields* to store data within a class, and we
explored how to access and modify the values of those fields.

Now, we will explore several ways to configure fields based on their intended
use.

.. index:: ! readonly field, ! readonly

Readonly Fields
---------------

A **readonly field** is one that cannot be changed once it is initialized. This
means slightly different things for primitive and class types. We create readonly
fields by declaring them with the ``readonly`` keyword.

We cannot change the value of a ``readonly`` field (``readonly int``,
``readonly double``, etc.) after it is initialized.

Similarly, we cannot assign a new object to a ``readonly`` field
(``readonly ClassName``, for example) after
initialization. However, because objects are reference types and not value types, we can change the values within the object itself.

Here are some examples to illustrate. Each class would normally be in its own
file, but we present them side-by-side for convenience. Additionally, we
declare each field ``public`` to minimize the example code and more clearly
demonstrate where compiler errors would occur.

.. admonition:: Examples

   In addition to ``Program.cs``, we have two classes in a ``FinalFields`` project, ``FinalFields`` and ``FortyTwo``.

   ``FortyTwo`` contains one declaration:

   .. sourcecode:: csharp

      public int IntValue = 42;

   ``FinalFields`` contains three declarations:

   .. sourcecode:: csharp

      public readonly int IntValue = 42;
      public readonly double DoubleValue;
      public readonly FortyTwo ObjectValue = new FortyTwo();

   Let's see what happens when we try to reassign values to our ``readonly`` fields in ``Program.cs``.

   .. sourcecode:: csharp
      :linenos:

      class Program
      { 
         static void Main(string[] args)
         {
            FinalFields Demo = new FinalFields();

            // This would result in a compiler error because IntValue has already been initialized.
            Demo.IntValue = 6;

            // This isn't allowed since we didn't initialize DoubleValue in the class declaration.
            Demo.DoubleValue = 42.0;

            // This would result in a compiler error.
            Demo.DoubleValue = 6.0;

            // This would result in a compiler error, since we're trying to
            // give objectValue a different object value.
            Demo.ObjectValue = new FortyTwo();

            // However, this is allowed since we're changing a field
            // inside the final object, and not changing which object
            // objectValue refers to.
            Demo.ObjectValue.IntValue = 6;
         }
      }

Readonly fields help to prevent accidentally (or intentionally) changing the
value of a field after it is initialized. As such, readonly fields may NOT
have setters.

.. index:: ! static field

Static Fields
--------------

A **static field** is one that is *shared by all instances of the class*, and
it is declared with the ``static`` keyword.

For example, in our ``Temperature`` class there is no reason for each
``Temperature`` object to hold its own copy of the double
``AbsoluteZeroFahrenheit``. That value remains constant in every class instance. Because of this, we make it a ``static`` field.

Previous examples used the ``static`` keyword with both fields and methods, but
since this discussion is focused on class data, let’s focus on static fields for now.

.. sourcecode:: csharp
   :linenos:

   public class Temperature {

      private double Fahrenheit;
      private static double AbsoluteZeroFahrenheit = -459.67;

      public double GetFahrenheit()
      {
         return Fahrenheit;
      }

      public void SetFahrenheit(double aFahrenheit)
      {

         if (aFahrenheit < AbsoluteZeroFahrenheit)
         {
            throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException("Value is below absolute zero");
         }

         Fahrenheit = aFahrenheit;
      }

      /* rest of the class... */
   }

Static fields cannot be referenced by class instances, but a static field can by referenced by the *type*.

.. admonition:: Example

   .. sourcecode:: csharp
      :lineno-start: 6

      // If the static field is public, we can do this
      Console.WriteLine("Absolute zero in F is: " + Temperature.absoluteZeroFahrenheit);

      // If we have an object named "Temp" of type Temperature, we cannot do this. 
      Console.WriteLine("Absolute zero in F is: " + Temp.absoluteZeroFahrenheit);

.. admonition:: Example

   As another example, we might also provide a third constructor for our
   ``Student`` class that only requires the student’s name. Theoretically, the
   ``StudentId`` field would (or could) be generated by the class itself.

   .. sourcecode:: csharp
      :linenos:

      public class Student {

         private static int NextStudentId = 1;
         public string Name { get; set; }
         private readonly int StudentId;
         public int NumberOfCredits { get; set; }
         public double Gpa { get; set; }

         public Student(string name, int studentId, int numberOfCredits, double gpa)
         {
            Name = name;
            StudentId = studentId;
            NumberOfCredits = numberOfCredits;
            Gpa = gpa;
         }

         public Student(string name, int studentId)
         {
            Name = name;
            StudentId = studentId;
            NumberOfCredits = 0;
            Gpa = 0.0;
         }

         public Student(string name)
         {
            Name = name;
            StudentId = NextStudentId;
            NextStudentId++;
            NumberOfCredits = 0;
            Gpa = 0.0;
         }
      }

In line 3, we add a static integer field that will keep track of the next
student ID to be assigned to a student. Then, our new constructor (line 26)
takes only a name as a parameter and assigns the student the next available ID.
This works because static fields are shared across all objects created from
the ``Student`` class, so it functions as a counter of sorts for the number of
``Student`` objects created.

Constants
---------

In C#, we can also declare a constant, or unchanging, variable, using the ``const`` keyword.

.. sourcecode:: csharp
   :linenos:

   public class Constants {
      public const double PI = 3.14159;
      public const string FIRST_PRESIDENT = "George Washington";
   }

A couple things to note from this example:

#. There is no strong reason to make constants ``private``, since restricting
   access would force us to re-declare the same values in different classes.
   We’ll generally make our constants ``public``.
#. We must declare and initialize a constant at the same time. If we do not
   declare and initialize the constant in the same statement, we cannot assign
   it a value later. The constant's value remains empty.

A good use of a constant can be seen in our ``Temperature`` class. Since
absolute zero will never change, we can ensure that nobody ever alters it
(intentionally or by mistake) by using ``const`` to make it a constant.

.. sourcecode:: csharp
   :linenos:

   public class Temperature {

      private double fahrenheit;

      public const double ABSOLUTE_ZERO_FAHRENHEIT = -459.67;

      /* rest of the class... */

   }

Check Your Understanding
-------------------------

.. admonition:: Question

   Assume that we define a ``Pet`` class that uses the fields ``name``,
   ``age``, ``mass``, and ``species``.

   Assuming you do not give your pet away, which of these fields should be
   declared ``final``? (There may be more than one).

   #. ``name``
   #. ``age``
   #. ``mass``
   #. ``species``

   Should any of the fields be declared ``static``?

   #. Yes
   #. No

.. The correct answers are "name", "species", and "No".

.. admonition:: Question

   Assume we define several fields in a ``Circle`` class. Which of
   the following is the BEST choice to be declared ``static``?

   #. ``radius``
   #. ``area``
   #. ``pi``
   #. ``circumference``

.. The correct answer is "pi".

.. admonition:: Question

   Which of the following is the BEST syntax for defining a variable to hold
   the (constant) speed of light in a vacuum?

   #. ``public const int SPEED_OF_LIGHT = 299792458;``
   #. ``private const int SPEED_OF_LIGHT = 299792458;``
   #. ``public const int SPEED_OF_LIGHT;``
   #. ``private const int SPEED_OF_LIGHT;``

.. The correct answer is "public const int SPEED_OF_LIGHT = 299792458;".
